Have you ever had that feeling of certainty over a “fact” but found out you were wrong?
Have you ever had that “aha” feeling when you had been struggling to understand something and suddenly it all fit together and became clear?

I feel certain that those feelings are part of our brain mechanisms that allow us to act on those facts and understanding. That is why I think that understanding how to make sure our certainties and understandings are as well-founded as possible is important, because otherwise we will make and act on a lot of poor choices but with far too much confidence that we are right.

There are a lot of things that I am quite certain of. You would have a really difficult time persuading me that I did not buy the drum over there — a Celtic bodhran — from its maker on the west coast of Ireland. Why? Partly because, if you challenged my memory, I could tell you about the trip, the craftsman’s workshop and other details, although to be honest, some of those details are fading. But mostly because I just feel certain about it. On the other hand, there are other events I have felt certain about that other people have had different memories of. That feeling of certainty is not always reliable. I have two interesting books on that subject. One is *On Being Certain: Believing You Are Right Even When You’re Not*, by neurologist Dr Robert Burton and the other is *On Certainty*, by the philosopher Wittgenstein. The first is good for the general reader and although the language in the other is not technical, it does assume some background knowledge of other philosophers that Wittgenstein is challenging.  
The goal of these workshops as a whole is to understand human systems better, with the intention of being able to change them for the better. I am finding as I write this that those feelings of certainty and understanding get in
the way, but I’m slowly challenging them and replacing them with others that are more well-founded.

There are two main challenges in both aspects.
1. The limitations of human minds compared with the complexity of the problems we face.
2. The attempts by vested interests to spread lies and misinformation to their own advantage.
The systems we need to understand and change in order to halt the increase in greenhouse gases, to resolve poverty and inequality among other pressing problems include national and global economies, nation-states, the military-industrial complex, cities, corporations, education systems, trans-national bodies such as the UN and international courts and many more.
There are huge numbers of academic papers written every year with new findings about how these things work; there are many more studies done by the research arms of corporations, governments and non-profit organizations. Nobody can read all of them or even enough of the most important ones to be able to bring the most relevant knowledge to bear when trying to make changes for the better.
However, we humans know how to collaborate so that levels of individual understanding can be improved through social mechanisms such as education systems, committee work, research and many more. These help give some individuals deeper understanding of specific topics and others the ability to work with experts to integrate their depths into broader understanding of what is needed for decision making.
Unfortunately, there are opposing forces who attempt to subvert these efforts on every level, from the individualists who insist that there is no such thing as society, that we should act as only a collection of individuals, to those who well understand the power of collaboration but use it as a platform to give them vast personal power and wealth, to the detriment of everyone else. They are extremely well-funded.
This means that the institutions need to be designed in such a way as to prevent them from being hijacked by the interests of the powerful, which is a challenge because of course those same powerful people will try to prevent such a design.
Understanding is not a binary concept. There is often a step when learning some that something seems to “click” in our brains when things seemed muddled before but much clearer after, so that we say “now I understand”. But that is often just the beginning. For example, I studied physics as an undergraduate, and have continued to read popular and technical works on the subject. So I could easily talk for half an hour on the topic of relativity, so that is good evidence that I have some level of understanding. I am reasonably confident that a real expert — such as a professor who teaches the subject — would confirm that I got a lot more-or-less right, but would find some errors — some significant -- and it would be clear that they had a much deeper understanding. So there is a wide range in how well people understand a topic.
There are also people who think they understand something, but do not. Experts would disagree with what they say and their predictions and claims of fact turn out to be false. Everybody does this to some extent; some of the thinking tools here are intended to help me find out where I do this.
Part of the problem comes from the fact that our understanding of things has to start somewhere, usually from the adults that surround us as babies and then increasingly from our peers. We tend to treat the things we learned as foundations for the rest of our learning as certainties.
Another part is our inclination to believe things if we are better off with a false understanding than otherwise. As Upton Sinclair said:

> It is difficult to get a man to understand something, when his salary depends on his not understanding it.

And this kind of influence on understanding can also come from the sense of well-being we get from being in peer groups who think in particular ways, whether this be social, political, religious or any other.
All of these social influences on our beliefs and understanding are another reason to think that Margaret Thatcher’s famous dictum “there is no such thing as society, there are only individuals and families” is completely backwards. Of course we can identify individual humans, but their beliefs are so dependent on their social connections, including education, work, media they follow, peer groups, that it is closer to the truth to say we have few thoughts of our own that we did not acquire from those connections, than it is to say that the thoughts in our head are purely our own, individual thoughts.  
